Morning, everyone. It's great to be here.
Thank you for inviting us to come along and talk about City Rail Link
project. My name's Jon Bridgeman. I'm the chair of City Rail Link Limited.
Tracy, how are you? And
with me, I've got Pat, the CE. We're just going to run through
quickly. I've got a few introductory remarks, and Pat will follow up with
a little bit more detail.
So I've had leadership
roles in the delivery of over $15 billion worth of underground
transport infrastructure,
and I'm immensely proud of the work that our team have
done since we last met here
to progress the project towards
completion and public use.
It's a very exciting time for us at City Rail Link Limited,
as we are only about 60 days away from
having the physical works complete and the final
run up to public use and the facility
being open.
This is great news for Aucklanders and New Zealand as a whole.
We can look forward to the biggest transport
transformation in Auckland since the Harbour Bridge.
For the benefit of those members of the committee who are new to
City Rail Link Limited, we were established in 2016, and
it's been our privilege to deliver the project for Auckland on behalf of
sponsors Auckland Council and the New Zealand Government.
City Rail Link is a $5.5 billion
3.45-kilometer underground railway that will
transform how Auckland moves. It'll unlock more frequent,
reliable, and high-capacity rail network in the city.
By removing the central city terminus
at Waitematā and adding two new through stations in the
central city, City Rail Link will make it far
quicker and easier for Aucklanders to access jobs, education,
events, and reduce traffic congestion on the road
network and support a more vibrant, productive city
center and region. Once operational, trains will
be running every four or five minutes
at peak times through the central city, and the capacity
to transport 19,000-
How often?
Four to five minutes.
Four to five minutes. Brilliant.
And it'll have the capacity to transport up to 19,000 passengers per hour
through the city central stations at opening.
That capacity can grow to 36,000 per hour over
time. And when we get- Sorry, what was that number again?
36,000. And when we get
nine cars implemented across the network, that can grow to
54,000 passengers per hour at peak.
The City Rail Link will also transform the transport
landscape in Auckland, supporting the city's growing population and creating
more places for people to live, work, and play.
Very proud of
having delivered on the sponsor's vision
contained within the project delivery agreement.
This included
an asset life of 100 years designed into the stations
to provide safe, resilient, accessible, and high-capacity rail
system for Auckland that can be something people are proud of for
years to come or decades to come.
Planning and design that went into the project in the early days has
enabled City Rail Link Limited to deliver a project that is world-class
in design and distinctly New Zealand, that
generations to come can be proud of.
City Rail Link will
challenge the notion that our infrastructure should only be
minimalist
and functional by being an asset that reflects an Auckland
that feels more like a grown-up city.
Aucklanders will also benefit from scope and design refinement that
have
happened along the way, such as the decision
in 2019 to increase the capacity of City Rail Link to
allow nine-car trains rather than the six that were originally
envisioned in the business case.
Extending the platforms at the three new stations and
providing the additional station entrance at Beresford Square is a
future-focused decision that makes City Rail Link able to
continue to deliver capacity as the population continues to grow in the
city.
So we're grateful of the support and advocacy our sponsors have
provided throughout the life of the project.
Regular
reporting to sponsors through our sponsors' representatives, as
well as monthly meetings with the mayor and minister, has ensured a
productive relationship with a no-surprises approach.
It's an exciting time for the project, as I say, as the majority of the physical
construction works are now complete.
We're now in testing and commissioning phase and well
advanced, and all parties are working to complete the project
and get people on the trains in the coming months.
Three new stations are finished and standing proudly in Auckland city
center. I think some of you are even going to go and have a look at them tomorrow.
And
we remain on track to open in the second half of this
year.
It's supposed to be the Aucklanders. It's the Aucklanders, I think. Yeah. Yes.
And the rest of us.
Move to Auckland.
I might have to come up and have a look. Anyway, carry on.
So we're just months away from Aucklanders being able to experience the
benefits of CRL
firsthand.And
as you would expect at this time, we face a lot of questions about exactly when
will it open.
Mm.
While that decision-
Spill the beans.
Sorry?
You got to spill the beans now.
No, I'm not.
Of course.
While that decision sits, and it's not my decision, unfortunately.
While that decision sits with sponsors and operators, we're
confident that the focus now is very much on getting to that finish line,
having a safe, reliable railway that's ready for
passengers in the near term. And we're looking forward to
getting Aucklanders on board later this year.
The relationship we've had with our delivery partners, Link Alliance,
has been very good. It's been positive and constructive.
There's been no secret that, and as many projects of this scale,
there's been normal commercial discussions underway for some time,
which are now in the final stages of being completed.
And we're confident to say that Link Alliance remains focused on achieving its
contractual completion obligations by the end of June,
or within a couple of days after, but more or less.
And the project remains on track for completion within the approved
funding envelope.
I'd just like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the extraordinary effort
that's gone on to getting the project to this point.
This has been a long, complex program delivered in the heart of the city.
Link Alliance and our other partners in Auckland Transport,
KiwiRail, Auckland One Rail, and the early completion
works contractors,
our regulators, and our emergency services have all done a sterling job to get
here. We shouldn't underestimate how complex this project is.
There are few, and I mean a handful, in the region that are as
large and as complicated and as difficult as this project is.
To do it in Auckland with a resource that's got no
experience in projects of this scale, this complexity,
is really outstanding. And we've been studying the timelines,
et cetera. Everyone says this project is late.
Yes, we're not up to the projected timelines, but we're only
six months late in a nine-year project.
So
given the challenges we've had,
and we're inside the funding envelopes, the changes in price have only
been scoped to a large extent. It's really an outstanding
project.
The legacy of City Rail Link is not only that we
see in the stations, but also in the standard that we've set and the way the
infrastructure is being delivered in New Zealand.
The benchmarks this project set in sustainability, social procurement,
health and safety, and Mana Whenua partnership is something the
team is immensely proud of and has been rewarded
for with awards from various groups.
These outcomes matter because they endure beyond the opening
date of City Rail Link. They leave Auckland
with critical transport infrastructure and leaves the
sector stronger and more capable to deliver
projects like this in the future. We have better skilled suppliers,
more sustainable delivery practices, and we can carry these into the
next generation of projects.
I agree.
So Pat's going to touch on briefly a couple of-
John, just with respect, this is great, but how much more time?
I'm finished. I was just going to say Pat-
Oh. I was going to say because otherwise we won't have much time for questions.
I don't know. Do you-
I'm-
We're happy to take questions. I've given you the high level.
I think you've given us the high level.
Pat, is there anything you desperately need to say?
I don't think so.
Sorry, Richard.
I'm in a minute.
No, I think John's covered most of it.
I did want to point out that,
with our main contractor, Link Alliance, but lots of other contractors working with
us, but that's Finci, Saltash, Bacci, Downer,
AECOM, Tonkin and Taylor, WSP, Aurecon supporting us.
A lot of key parties made the success that we've had.
Very
thankful for what we've achieved in the health and safety area because that is one
of our key paramount focuses.
We've had a very strong health and safety record over a long period of time, and
that's all credit to the contractors that we've worked with and the high standards
that they maintain with the Link Alliance contract
alone, 24 million hours worked,
and with a very strong health and safety performance.
So perhaps I could leave it there. There'll be questions on the Target Hardship
Fund, which has been also a critical part of the project
and has now come to a close at the end of March.
And we're currently in our, what we call our trial
operations and emergency response testing phase.
So we completed more recently the systems integration, all the
systems working together, and now focused on running the
railway and the stations together, working very closely with Auckland Transport,
Auckland One Rail, and KiwiRail.
That started last week, and we've also started our emergency response
testing. The first test was last week.
This will continue through
May and into early June.
So that's the key phase that we're in right now.
And if you come on site, you
may come across one of these emergency scenarios being
worked on. That's an example of fire on the train, a fire in the tunnel.
There are various scenarios that we run through.
Working very closely with FENS,
police, and St. John's, and those partners are really critical for us also.
So that's the stage we're at right now, and so still a lot of key testing
to go through, but we're in a good place.
Very useful addition there. I'm going to take the two Aucklanders first, and then
I'm going to go to-
Further south, so to speak.
You as well?
Yeah.
Yeah, okay. Right, cool.
Hey, thanks, John-
We're running tight
... John and Patrick for your leadership and to your team
as well. I know it's been a massively complex project
over many years. So
on behalf of Auckland, we're really excited about it finally
being open.
John, probably no surprise, my question is probably diving into the when it's going
to be open. So, you've mentioned-
Don't even try.
... mentioned
60 days from now the work's completed, so that's 30 June.
Does that mean that in terms of the disruption around the CBD,
does that come to an end at 30 June?
It's ended already. The disruption we've created
has been tidied up for some months.
Fair enough.
Any road cones are nothing to do with us.
Okay. That's good to know.
The T-shirt that says the only road
cone Not my road cone.
It's largely-
There were some precinct-
Go, John. Yeah
... there were some precinct works around the stations.
Those were undertaken by Auckland Transport. They've been completed also.
We've had some openings, opening ceremonies, and blessings around the
precincts surrounding the three stations.
One of the more recent ones was the Waitematā Station
Plaza that was opened up. And you might recall the glass work has been cleaned,
and it hasn't been cleaned for about 10 years, but we've been able to open that up
and similarly at the other stations.
But those are open now and available to the public.
Where possible, we've pulled back fences and tried to give
the public as much space as possible.
And in terms of open for the public, are you targeting particular
month or particular quarter of the year?
You're trying, aren't you?
It's really not our call. There's quite a number of steps that
AT need to go through.
Yeah.
Both internally and externally.
There's a process for trying to land those issues that's current
at the moment, and
it's imminent.
Mm.
Okay. So that's the last question on timing.
Oh, okay. Yeah. And then finally just reflecting on the project.
Looking back, reflections on
key learnings for the project. I know we've delivered it within the
funding envelope, but it had to be increased.
But any takeaways on key learnings to
how to
execute this?
We're planning to undertake a lessons learned study that
will be done within this year.
We're underway scoping that out and have
discussed it with the sponsors in terms of that.
So that'll cover a
wide range of project activities
so that we can take our lessons learned.
There are lessons learned in projects-
Mm
... and that will benefit future infrastructure projects in New Zealand.
So-
At a high level, are you, any that you can allude to for the committee?
I think the critical ones are trying to define the scope
appropriately or how a project like this fits within a
program of work. That's because the scope was increased
significantly after we started, and that's always been hard for people
to get their heads around.
Yeah.
And there's still
questions about some of the follow-on work that's necessary in terms of level
crossings and other network improvements-
Mm
... to be able to achieve the capacity the project offers.
So that idea of how a project fits within a program is really important in
understanding what that program means over time.
So,
stakeholders, particularly sponsors and owners, can understand
what that looks like in the fullness of time.
Yeah.
The other big lesson I think is the joint venture between the
Crown and council, in this instance, has been really
helpful.
The buy-in and accountability arrangements that that
delivers is very powerful for the project and supports the
project very well.
Okay.
And so it's a model, I think that's valuable.
If you look at major projects around the world, they would say getting local
authority
buy-in to a big project like this, if it's centrally funded, is
fundamental to success.
Right. Yeah.
And the joint venture has done that very well.
Right. Cool.
And-
That's, sorry. Is that brief enough?
Or you want me-
No, I'm just going to keep on going around.
Okay.
Call us then Stevie then Simon. So for me, those are the two very big-
Okay
... issues that come out.
Super.
Thank you.
Very technical question. How many total tests have been completed
so far? And what is the issues or risk being identified
during the testing?
Well, I think through the systems testing with over 16,000
tests,
it's probably a bit higher than that now.
Mm.
We're-
We're a few
... we're probably about 99% through those tests.
I think that
we haven't had any, what I would call fatal flaws through the testing.
We've had issues. We always have issues.
You have some tests that fail, and you have to go back and do the retest
until you succeed. That just takes time.
We haven't had anything though that's
had a major impact on program, for example.
It is just getting through the volume.
Mm.
You need a little bit of luck along the journey as well-
Mm
... with the testing. But
overall, it's gone very well.
So this mean the system haven't been tested under different
scenario, including disruption or crisis
situation or how's the system being performed in those
situation?
That's sort of what we're doing now.
Yeah.
The trial operations, there are a
number of tests that we're undertaking right at this moment, again, through to
June. That's including, for example, if there was a power
failure or infrastructure issue with the stations or the rail
network, and then the emergency response testing-
Mm
... such as a fire on the train. So those tests are
started at the beginning of, or actually last week, and will continue through the
first week of June. Beyond that, Auckland
Transport and Auckland One Rail as the rail operator will continue just to keep
running the trainsKeep getting familiar with the asset
and the systems, and just ensuring that they're very comfortable to be able to open
the railway in a safe and reliable manner.
So you also mentioned in your opening remarks that you have been
tested for integration with the existing rail network.
Mm.
Is it including other passenger and freight services, or is it
including all the peak hours as well?
Oh, there's the whole network timetable, but I think when we talk about that
systems integration, it's integration with the existing system that
Auckland Transport have and the
new systems that we're providing. So it's integrating them.
If you take Waiotama Station, for example, an existing station,
it's our systems integrating with the existing system at
Waiotama. We are fortunate that Honeywell are a key
systems provider to Auckland Transport already.
They're also assisting us with our station systems,
which does facilitate that connectivity.
And also-
It also covers the wider rail network
system, so signaling, communications-
Mm
... train monitoring, et cetera.
Just last question. The on-time performance against the planned
timetable, how does it look like during the testing?
The timetable testing's gone-
The on-time performance.
Yes. It's gone well. We had timetable testing
in January this year, and then most recently, the week of April
13th to 15th. That timetable testing is led by Auckland
Transport, Auckland On Rail, and Kiwi Rail.
But the last testing that we did in April was successful,
and that's based on a certain number of trains per hour that's
running a greater number of trains on the network.
And that testing has gone well. I think it leads into
confidence around the timetable when we eventually open.
Oh, excellent. Thank you.
Okay. Celia.
Thank you. Very interesting. I did want to ask about the targeted
hardship fund,
because on much smaller projects, it's often asked for and
we don't always do it.
That 12 million, was that 50/50 from the council and from
government?
Yes.
Okay. And has it all been spent?
We've spent 10.7 million out of 12.
Okay.
With the funds-
So this goes back to...
Goes back to when the fund was established in 2021, and
we've supported 72 businesses over that
time.
Great. And did you have...
Obviously you've got criteria for that.
Mm.
Was there anything that you would change about the criteria, or
worked pretty well?
I think overall, it
served its purpose and we're proud of how we managed that fund.
It was a difficult time for businesses because it wasn't just the-
Mm
... the disruption caused by the project.
As you know, we had COVID and then we had the economic challenges the country
had. So it's been
sympathetic to the businesses. It's been a difficult journey for them.
But I think that the targeted hardship fund was critical.
Great.
A really important element and something that we would
encourage for other projects, particularly if you're having to do a project in the
middle of a central business district.
I know it's not easy for businesses.
So part of our lessons learned- ...
we do later in the year, the targeted hardship fund.
Well, we'll have to feed back from you then at some point.
I had a couple more questions. I was born in
London, so I grew up using the Tube and the difference between the old
stations and some of the new ones, like the Jubilee Line and the Queen
Elizabeth Line, just startling. And so I'm
quite excited to come to Auckland at some point.
But
you've talked about the connection with other trains.
Could you clarify, for example, if I do want to come up, I'd like to know where the
Northern Explorer's now going to come to.
Has that been...
What?
That's something I'm not sure. You'd need to ask Kiwi Rail on that.
Okay.
But I think there's a,
just clarify,
City Rail Link is a connection within the Auckland rail network.
Yes.
So the existing metro trains that they have in Auckland will continue.
They just run differently. So there's a different timetable and a different
configuration of the way the trains will run.
So it meets up and...
Yeah. They use the infrastructure to be able
to get better use out of the existing
network. The other trains that run around the
country won't get as far as City Rail Link.
It's a facility, it's a link within the
Auckland Metro train network.
Hopefully we'll be able to connect-
One more question
... reasonably close. Okay, and the last one was,
do you think this network is
future-proofed for the
next 30 years? That you don't see those, "Oh, I wish we'd
also added on this or gone further or put another
station." Is there any thought that it is going to need
any expansion? Sorry-
You wouldn't-
... I haven't quite finished this one, but you know.
No. There isn't really room to put in another station.
They're quite close together as it is.
Well, I was more... Yeah, okay.
The
future-proof pieces that have been added,
Beresford entrance was a big addition, and that's
quite a critical piece. The major bit
was putting in the capacity for nine cars, and that
will stand
a much greater test of time than what the six-car
capacity would.
Good. A pleasure.
Thank you.
Well, actually, thank you. My questions are around the capacity and the peak
passenger capacity. So you've talked 19,000 passengers per hour at
opening, growing to 36 per hour over time, and then
54,000 to the nine car. So can you just explain the sort of
timeframe scope opportunities of when that is likely
to kick in, in terms of hitting the
nine car
Metric
The nine car thing. Well, I think that the
forecasts sort of talk about 2040 for six car
capacity.
Mm-hmm.
In that sort of timeframe. Now, those depend very much on
what point in time you start. When there
was a higher passenger transport use just prior to COVID,
people were saying, "Well, that might be hit a bit earlier."
If you go back a little bit earlier in time, then they would say that peak
may be later. So trying to project what that
forward growth is going to be is quite tricky.
The 54,000 is you have to put in
nine car capacity across the network, so before you can hit
that sort of volume, and
that's quite an investment. But you don't have to go digging up
Auckland to do it
when you do do it.
Mm.
Because that investment has been made now.
What, on opening, will be the car capacity?
19,000.
And how many cars?
Oh, six.
Oh.
Well, the Auckland network only has six car capacity at the moment.
Right. Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah, that was what I thought.
That'll be platform lengths, won't it?
Yes.
Yeah. Sorry.
So just interested as to how the relationship and
performance issues that were experienced with the operators of the system, with
Kiwi Rail and AT earlier on in the project have been resolved.
And are you comfortable that they're going to be in a position to
take over
the assets that you've built?
Yes.
Yes. We've worked very closely with them since the
inception.
Relationship's very strong. We established what we call a, I was going to touch on
it earlier, One Client Alliance, which is essentially ourselves, Kiwi Rail,
AT, and Auckland running together, working together.
Again, it's an informal alliance, but we call it the One Client, so we
speak with one voice
to improve collaboration and the way we interact with the alliance, the
alliance contractor.
And I think generally that's gone really well.
The collaboration between all the parties has been really positive and
strong.
Okay. An earlier Lessons Learned Report carried out by Infrastructure Commission
found that-
Five years over
... there were some gaps, and it wasn't as strong as it could have been earlier on
in the project life cycle.
So are you saying that there's been significant improvement or
resolution of some of those issues that were identified?
Yes. And as Matt said, One Client Alliance was a major part
in doing that.
Okay.
It addressed a whole series of some of those issues,
the governance gaps, but also supported the project,
particularly in the systems space, to overcome the need for
each of the entities to have their own advice in that area.
Yeah.
The systems piece was able to be dealt with at a project
level much more effectively. And that's all to do with
integration and how the project at the end of the day works.
Kiwi Rail are effectively running the network, the
tunnels now, and the rail part of the project.
Whilst the asset hasn't been handed over to them, they control it at this
stage, and that's working seamlessly.
There's about 18,000 trips
through the tunnel so far of trains.
Okay. Fascinating. So just in terms of the Lessons Learned
wrap up that you're planning to do-
Yes
... will you be involving Infrastructure Commission in that, given that they've
already done report one and report two?
We
haven't chosen a party to undertake the report yet.
We're in the process of trying to select someone
to help us with that, but obviously having someone with rail
experience. But we're just going through that process right now
to select a party to work with us,
and
we'll obviously be very happy to coordinate with the Infrastructure
Commission.
We want to build on the studies that have been done before.
Yeah, I think that's really important because
given all the challenges the project had, including COVID shutdowns and changes in
scope, being able to bring it in within the budget
envelope relatively on time.
It's a wonderful achievement if that's what's delivered.
I think it'll be incredibly helpful for the rest of the public sector delivering
infrastructure to get those insights and to be able to have that shared.
That's definitely the plan, to be able to share those insights
externally. Absolutely.
Great. Excellent.
Good. Couple of quick questions from me.
First one is just the issue of network integration.
We're all familiar with the issue that there's a whole bunch of road crossings that
need
to be addressed one way or the other, that's going to take quite a while to roll
that out. Can you just talk to us, though, just generally about how the
CRL integrates and how ready, and we know that Kiwi
Rail has been lots of hardening up the tracks and so on, and doing that sort of
work. But how ready the system is to cope with that level of
growth. We've gone from the, we've got the 54,000 passengers, et
cetera, if we get to that sort of stage.
The system as a whole being able to deal with that sort of growth.
Or is that just something that's sort of beyond your-
That's really,
I think
you'd need to address that more with Kiwi Rail.
Okay.
Obviously, there are some very big changes that need to happen
around level crossings-
Yeah
... stations across the network,
Wiri,
other bottlenecks that exist.
And that investment is predicated, but you're talking quite a period of time before
you want to make that-
But to maximize the benefit from CRL, there are some other changes which are
required.
If you want to get to that level. Is there that level of demand when-
That's a different matter.
Yeah. And that sort of, so you've got a chicken and egg.
Yeah.
The point is that the decision was made in
2018 really,
or 19, 18, that we don't want to go back and have to
retrofit those stations.
Understand that. No. Most-
And that provision was-
Most completely
... was put there. Along with a provision for platform screen
doors, which enable driverless trains.
You can't
get to driverless trains without that, and it would be difficult to put that in
later.
And that's a scope change as well?
Yes.
So there are a number of scope changes.
The platform length, the Beresford entrance and that-
Platforms screen doors, and some other connection issues around Britomart
and New Market
So because the budget for the project was increased at one
point.
2019.
Is that a reasonable reflection of the increases in the scope?
Yes.
So someone said we wanted more, we paid for more, we got more.
Yeah. We put the structure in place for platforms.
We haven't put the platform screen doors obviously, but the structure's there to
avoid disruption further down the track of where there would've been major
disruption-
I might-
They have to close the stations down
Yeah, a lot easier to do when it's closed.
If you go back to the original business case, it was $2.5
billion in 2015. There's been
$1.6 billion worth of scope changes, whether it be Beresford
Street,
platform screen doors, all those sort of things that we've talked about today.
1.6 billion. There's about $700
million in cost of a year's delay on COVID,
and
a couple of hundred million or $300 million on increased risk and
complexity,
against what was understood at that original business case.
And some property and corporate cost issues that are about $400 million, and
that gets you to the
5.5 that we're currently at.
It's good to have that breakdown. Yeah, thank you.
And look, the other question was just about the staff, the contractors who worked
on the project, and one of the things we talked about a lot is pipeline.
And we know that one element there, and there was some coverage of that about
tunnelers and sort of, "Okay, we've done our tunneling.
Brilliant." And now there are no more tunneling jobs in New Zealand, so we're off
somewhere else. That happens. But just generally, it's a
big project.
And you've got the other big project in Auckland, which is the airport.
But just how is the workforce... What are you seeing of the workforce flowing
through to other
projects, and just how that's being managed?
I can-
Yeah.
Sorry, I can possibly.
We're based in the same building as the contractors, so we-
Mm-hmm
... see the comings and goings. Obviously, there's a lot of demobilization of
staff-
Yeah
... from the contractor side.
The Australian market's pretty active, and it's still very busy from an
infrastructure perspective.
So opportunities will be there. I know a lot of
companies will be looking at the PPP up north and opportunities that come out of
that selection process.
And so that will create-
You're talking about the expressway then?
Yes.
Yeah.
That will create opportunities.
But naturally, as you've got international companies, they have to go to where the
workers are. And if they're specialist workers, they will often have
to repatriate offshore or go back.
I do know from interacting with these workers on a daily basis that they've loved
working here, and have really enjoyed New Zealand and working on the
project.
But unfortunately, we will see a lot of them leave, because of their specialist
skills. As you mentioned, Andy, the tunnels, for example.
That was some time ago.
Again, that's very helpful. Look, I think we are at time, very much.
Really appreciate it.
I hope you enjoyed taking some of our Auckland colleagues around.
Unfortunately, I've got a board meeting tomorrow.
Oh, well. But if there's a possibility of the rest of us being organized, could we
do that?
Oh, that's always possible.
I think he said Auckland guys.
I think I said Auckland guys. I think.
Anyway, would
you like to do that, colleagues?
The offer is always there.
Okay. I think we will arrange it.
Okay. Sounds good.
Yeah. Brilliant. No, thank you. Really appreciate it. Thank you.
Go well with the rest of the project. We look forward to seeing it soon.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thanks for your support.